				TCLL1
		The TCLL1 Parser Generator and Parser
		(TC: "Tools of Computing")

BUILD1.BAT    MS-DOS batch file to compile TCLL1. It should be
		able to execute	as a shell script under UNIX.

TCLL1.ICN	main program for TCLL1
LL1.ICN		LL(1) parser generation routines
SCANGRAM.ICN	scanner for input grammars
SEMGRAM.ICN	semantics routines for handling the input grammars
TCLL1.GRM	grammar for input grammars
TCLL1.LL1	translated input grammar for input grammars
GRAMANAL.ICN	context-free grammar analysis module

PARSELL1.ICN	LL(1) parser
READLL1.ICN	input routine for translated grammars
SEMSTK.ICN	semantics routines called by PARSELL1.ICN to handle
		the semantics stack

RPTPERR.ICN	routine to report syntax errors

SEMOUT.ICN	semantics routines just to write out the tokens and
		action symbols (for early stages of debugging the
		grammar)


		Building the parser generator

Before reading the rest of this description of TCLL1, you
should compile it on your own system. That will allow you to
try out the test grammars as they are discussed.

If you do not have a copy of Icon, you can get it over the
Internet: ftp it from cs.arizona.edu:
	ftp ftp.cs.arizona.edu
	name: anonymous
	password: your_e-mail_address
	cd icon

Versions of Icon for several machines are in subdirectories of
directory icon. You may also want to pick up the Icon
Programming Library.

If you have the Icon Programming Library (IPL) installed on a
DOS/WINDOWS machine, you can execute the batch file
mktcll1.bat to build the parser generator. The three files from
the IPL that the parser generator uses are included with this
distribution and can be compiled separately. To build the
parser generator by hand, you may execute

	rem 	These are from the Icon Program Library:

	icont -c  escape ebcdic xcode

	rem 	These form the parser generator proper

	icont -c gramanal ll1 semstk readll1 parsell1 scangram semgram
	icont -fs tcll1

The first icont line compiles the files from the IPL. You may
omit the line if you have the IPL installed. The second icont
line compiles modules used by the parser generator. The third
line compiles the parser generator's main program. The flag -fs
tells the translator that the parser generator calls some
procedures by giving their names as strings. In Icon version 8,
this flag is not needed; in version 9 it is.

To use TCLL1 to build a parsing table, execute

		Under Icon version 8:

	iconx tcll1 grammar.grm

		Under Icon version 9:

	tcll1 grammar.grm

where grammar.grm is the grammar file. The output of the parser
generator will be encoded parse tables in file grammar.ll1 . If
you would also like a listing of the grammar and diagnostic
information, execute

		Under Icon version 8:

	iconx tcll1 -p grammar.grm

		Under Icon version 9:

	tcll1 -p grammar.grm

Tlcll1 reads its own parsing table from file tcll1.ll1 which
must be in the current directory.

