MODIFICATION CHECKLIST
<<ARIZONA-ONLY>>

Icon maintenance has evolved from infrequent formal releases to a system of
continual modifications that are immediately available publicly through GitHub.
When a set of changes is ready to go:

Set the version number and date (for &version) in src/h/version.h.
The date should be the date of modification, i.e. today's date.
The version number should be of the form  9.5.yyx  where
	yy is the last two digits of today's year
	x is an alphabetic sequence character within the year (a,b,c,...)

Update doc/relnotes or doc/faq if warranted, also changing the date at the top.

Do full rebuilds and tests, both with and without graphics.
Do this on multiple architectures if warranted by non-trivial edits.
Verify the appearance of &version as printed by the tests.
Check in the changes.
Set a Git "annotated" tag of the form "v9.5.yyx" (note the leading v):
	git tag -a "v9.5.yyx" -m "fix xxx yyy problem on zzz"
Push the mods *with the tag*:
	git push
	git push --tags

Propagate documentation changes to the website "ugide" directory.
Rebuild the IPL documentation if necessary.
Send an announcement to the Icon-language mailing list if warranted.


-------------------------------------------------------------------
The old checklist for periodic heavyweight releases was as follows:

review diffs; check vs release notes; check spelling
run manual gtests
run full library test script (ipl/CheckAll)
build & test on several platforms

set final value for &version
update version numbers in doc files
update date in man page files
grep for other places to update the version number
review docs especially acknowledgments
update FAQ
update README
run "make" in the doc directory

copy source and make Dist-Clean to prune ARIZONA-ONLY, .git, etc
install source package for distribution
make binary packages & put in place
make library package and test with Jcon
update Jcon copy of library

make new v9nn web directory and install docs
rebuild and install library reference pages
update other web pages to reference new version
edit configuration names on other pages (e.g. Mac, Cygwin)

install updated FAQ
sync FTP area 
update website status page
update other website pages
change redirection of /icon/current URLs (.htaccess AND symlink)
add "superseded" line to previous release index.htm
post announcement comp.lang.icon

tag distributed version in Git
modify &version setting in Git copy
